Things to do in Yorkshire.
 1.Do some sport in the Yorkshire Dales National Park.
  The National Park is an outdoor paradise for sporty people. There are paths where you can go trekking, cycling and horse riding. You can also go rock climbing, canoeing and sailing. But the best thing about the park is the beauty of the countryside. It's spectacular.
  2 .Travel by steam train. 
 If you don't like trekking, a journey by steam train is a great way to see the Yorkshire countryside. You can see the beautiful hills and valleys from the comfort of your train. 
 3 Go shopping in York.
 The centre of York has got lots of excellent shops. It's the perfect place to buy your holiday souvenirs. And when you need a break, you can stop for a sandwich and a drink in a traditional cafe or a tearoom.
 4 Visit York Castle Museum Find out about life in the past through photos and exhibitions. Walk down a Victorian street to see how people lived 150 years ago. Go into the shops and talk to the people in Victorian costume. This fascinating museum is in the centre of York, in front of the castle. Check the museum's website for opening times and special exhibitions. 
 5 Spend a day at the Yorkshire Wildlife Park Lions, lemurs, parrots and lizards -there are animals from all around the world in the park. You can also see one of the rarest species of tiger in the world: the Siberian tiger. All the animals live in big open spaces in the park and visitors can see them from the footpaths. 
 6 Visit the Yorkshire Sculpture Park If you like walking and you like art, this is the place for you. Walk around the park to see more than 60 sculptures in the beautiful gardens. There are also exhibitions in five indoor galleries. There are restaurants, cafes and souvenir shops. Check the park's website for opening times and special events. 
 7 See a play or a pop concert Yorkshire has got lots of theatres. Pop, film and television stars often perform here. Check the theatre guide to find a theatre near you. Perhaps your favourite pop star is going to perform tonight!.
 