One child policy in China. 
 If you visit China today, you won't see any big families. That's because between 1979 and 2015, people could only have one child. Why did the Chinese  government pass this law? In the 1970s, there were about 975 million people in China and the population was increasing very quickly - by 1.9% each year. This was a time when people were having very ' big families, but they didn't have enough money to support them. In addition to economic concerns, the Chinese government wanted to prevent environmental problems. So they passed the one-child law.
 The Chinese government punished parents who broke the one-child law. People had to pay a large fine and some people even lost their jobs. Then, they decided to allow some parents to have two children. But this was mainly in areas where people needed help on their farms. As a result of this law, China's young population continued to decrease. Now, this is causing a new problem in the country. There are around 1.4 billion people in China but about 30% are over the age of 50. People stop working at the age of 50, so now there aren't enough people to work in all the factories, businesses and public services.
 In order to solve this problem, the government has decided to change the law again.
 Now, for the first time in almost 40 years, all parents in China can have a second child. Some people think that it will be too difficult to have more than one child. They will need more money for food and clothes, but they will work fewer hours and earn less. However, most people are happy about the government's decision because they didn't think that one-child law was fair. It will also make life easier for the children whose parents and grandparents all want them to succeed. When you're an only child, there is a lot of pressure on you to do well and make your family proud. Also, an only child must take care of old parents and grandparents alone. That's a huge responsibility. In the future, Chinese children can share those responsibilities with a brother or sister. 
 