Can animals predict the weather?.
 Do you think that animals can predict weather or natural disasters? Read about some countries around the world with different beliefs about animals and weather.
 USA.
 Every year on 2nd February, people in the USA come together to watch a ground hog come out of its home in the ground. According to the tradition, if it's cloudy when the ground hog comes out, then spring will come early. But, if it's sunny, winter wi ll last for six more weeks. Where does this belief come from? Europeans used animals to try to predict the arrival of spring and German immigrants to the USA brought this tradition with them. The first Groundhog Day celebration in the USA was on 2nd February, 1887,in Pennsylvania. Since then, crowds of up to 40,000 people get together in Pennsylvania every year to celebrate Groundhog Day. A ground hog named Phil makes the predictions in Pennsylva nia and has become a national celebrity. Do you think the ground hog can
 really predict the weather?. Weather data shows that Phil the ground hog has been right only 39% of the time.
 China.
 Recently, the Chinese government has started using chickens, fish and frogs to try to predict earthquakes. Workers at animal parks and zoos in the eastern town of Nanjing are giving information to the government about the behaviour of the animals twice a day. Workers are looking for frogs moving as a group, fish jumping out of the water and chickens in the trees. This is not the first time that the Chinese government has used animal behaviour to predict a disaster. After getting reports of unusual animal behaviour in 1975, the Chinese government evacuated the city of Haicheng the day before an earthquake. But in 2008, the government ignored reports of animals acting strangely
 just hours before one of China's worst earthquakes. Scientists are still not sure if and how
 animals can sense earthquakes, but there have been many theories and studies. Hopefully,
 the animals can help save lives when China's next earthquake hits.
 India.
 For centuries, farmers in India have looked to animals and insects to help them predict rain.
 Local farmers don't depend on national weather forecasts when they are planting their vegetables. They need precise information about when it's going to rain in their villages, and they're especially interested in when the monsoon season is going to start. According to tradition, if goats keep moving their ears or sheep keep close together in groups, rain is coming. Farmers also listen for owls and watch for frogs and dragonflies as a sign of rain. Actually, these animals and insects can predict rain
 because they can sense humidity and changes in the atmosphere.
 