Famous detectives.
 Sherlock Holmes is probably the most popular detective in crime fiction,
 but he has got some competition. Here are some other famous crime
 detectives you can find on the bookshelf.
 Mrs. Marple.
 Miss Marple appears in 12 Agatha Christie novels and 20 short stories. There are also films and TV programmes about her. Miss Marple lives in the village of St Mary Meade, and when there is a murder, she is always ready to help investigate. The police think she is just a nosy old woman, but they soon discover the truth. Miss Marple has got a few things they haven't got: age, intuition and an understanding of human nature. Her most important skill is her ability to observe and remember. Criminals must be careful around her: she looks like she is busy knitting, but she is really watching and listening.
 Nancy Drew.
 She's young, she's pretty and she has solved over 350 mysteries!. Her name is Nancy Drew, and she is one of the most popular teenage detectives in the world. Newspaper reporter Mildred Wirt wrote the first Nancy Drew book in 1930 under the name of Carolyn Keene. Nancy isn't an ordinary teenager; she goes to parties and has got a boyfriend, but she prefers crime to romance. Unlike most teenagers, she's very independent. She hasn't got parents telling her when to be home, and she has got her own car and lots of money. Today, more than 80 years after the first Nancy Drew book appeared in bookshops, there are Nancy Drew books, comics, TV programmes, films and computer games.
 The Forensic Scientist.
  There's a new kind of detective on the police force: the forensic scientist. Today, science is an important part of crime investigation. Forensic science helps the police identify victims and helps them find proof to put criminals in prison.
 The work of a forensic scientist begins at the crime scene. Police officers collect evidence and then catalogue it. Then the forensic scientist analyses the evidence and tests it. For example, he or she tests blood or hair samples for DNA and checks food for poison or chemicals. A good forensic scientist can learn a lot from a piece of paper, a stone or a footprint. For example, from just one footprint he or she can learn about the height and weight of a person. In crime investigation, every bit of evidence is important: a spot of dirt, a footprint or a cigarette butt can tell the forensic scientist who was or wasn't at the crime scene.
 