Al-Andalus Islam in the iberian peninsula.
 The Muslim conquest
 In 711, a small group of Arabs and Berbers crossed the Strait of Gibraltar under the command of Tariq, lieutenant to Muza , the Muslim governor of North Africa. Their intention was to loot and plunder. Having easily defeated the Visigoth King Rodrigo at the Battle of Guadalete (711), they were encouraged to continue their advance. 
 The Peninsula offered little resistance and was quickly occupied. The causes were Muslim  military superiority, the internal conflicts of the Visigoths, and the support offered to the invaders by Jews and Visigoth nobles, who surrendered in exchange for keeping their properties.
 The Muslim invasion was halted in the northern mountainous region, where certain groups of Christian resistance emerged, and the Muslims were defeated by the Asturians in the Battle of Covadonga (722).The Muslims launched attacks on the south of France, until they were defeated by the Franks at The Battle of Poitiers (732). After this defeat, the Muslims retreated south of the Pyrenees.
 They called the conquered region of the Iberian Peninsula al-Andalus. The territory was organised as an emirate, a politically and religiously dependent province of the Umayyad Caliphate of Damascus. The capital was established in the city of Cordoba.
 The evolution of al-Andalus until 1031.
 The independent emirate (756-929).
 In 755, the Umayyad prince Abd al-Rahman reached the Peninsula, fleeing from the dethronement and assassination of his family by the Abbasids. After defeating the emir of al-Andalus, he proclaimed himself the independent emir in 756. This title implied his political independence from the Abbasid caliphs of Baghdad , although he continued to recognise their religious authority. 
 During this time, al-Andalus suffered numerous conflicts. The Christians in the north took Zamora. The Franks conquered Barcelona and Girona and created the Spanish March, a borderline province south of the Pyrenes. The Muladis or converts to Islam, who felt discriminated by the Arab minority, revolted.
 The Caliphate of Cordoba and the Taifas (929-1031).
 In the year 929, Abd al-Rahman III broke away from religious dependence on Baghdad and proclaimed himself caliph or 'Prince of the Faithful'. This action initiated a period of great political and cultural splendour in al-Andalus. Abd al-Rahman reorganised the army, ended the internal revolts and conducted punitive expeditions against the peninsular Christian kingdoms, who were obliged to pay him taxes. In this period, Cordoba became the most important city in the  West.This cultural flourishing continued under al-Hakam 11. His successor,Hisham II,  delegated government to Almanzor, a military leader who conquered and looted Barcelona and Santiago. When he died in 1002, however, the caliphate sank into a serious political crisis due to the lack of authority of the caliphs.
 The caliphate officially endured until 1031. On that date, the governors of the different provinces declared themselves independent and the caliphate disintegrated into twenty-eight small taifas or independent kingdoms which subsisted until 1086.
 Government and administration.
 The government of al-Andalus was held by the emirs and the caliphs who concentrated all political authority, ran the administration, dictated foreign policy, ruled the army, and administered justice. The caliphs also held religious power.
 Both rulers were aided by officials, the most important of which were the hajib, or prime minister,
 who controlled administration and finance, and the viziers, who advised the emir or caliph in a council called the Maswar.
 The administration of the territory was organised into provinces or coras, which consisted of a capital and the surrounding territory. Each province had a governor or wali, and judges or kadis.
 Territorial control was completed with the collection of taxes, which were higher for those who were not Muslims.
 There was also a powerful army, mostly made up of mercenaries.
 The Andalusi economy.
 Agricultural activities.
 Agriculture was the basis of the economy' of al-Andalus and the rest of the Islamic empire.
 Traditional products of the Mediterranean regions, such as cereals, wine and olives, were grown in the dry lands.
 The irrigated land was used to grow garden crops. Many other crops and goods were also introduced from the East, such as sugar cane, rice, oranges, lemons, saffron, cotton and mulberry.
 The Muslims extended irrigation with the creation of reservoirs, canals, wells and waterwheels. They improved land use through the use of fertilisers and by reducing fallow lane. This' increased agricultural production and diversified the food supply.
 The primary sector was completed by livestock farming, focused on breeding sheep, horses and
 silkworms, and by fishing.
 Mining exploited metals such as iron, copper,lead,gold, silver, mercury and tin. Salt mines were also important.
 Urban activities.
 The main economic activities of the cities were trade and crafts.
 Crafts proot.ced cotton, linen, silk and brocade fabrics. Ceramic and glass objects were also made; ivory, wood and leather were worked; parchment, papyrus and paper were   manufactured. The latter was introduced by the Muslims to the Peninsula.
 Minting gold (dinar) and silver (dirham) coins favoured trade.Domestic trade was carried out in the souks or markets of each city.Foreign trade was boosted by the strategic location of al-Andalus between Europe and Africa. The Andalusi merchants sold food products, raw materials and goods manufactured in their cities throughout the Mediterraneam. They brought luxury goods like tapices from the East;gold, ivory and black slaves from the North of Africa, and white slaves from Europe.
 Social diversity.
 In Andalusi society there were different ethnic groups, religions (Islam, Christianity and Judaism), and economic and power levels. According to this last criterion, there were two distinguishable groups.
 The aristocracy or jassa, A small group formed by the family members of the caliph and the Arab conquerors, some 50000 people. They held high positions and possessed extensive properties.
 The mass of the population or amma. They made up the rest of society and included the peasants and city dwellers.They consisted mostly of the old Hispanic population of the Visigoth period, which in certain cases maintained their Christian religion and customs and were called the Mozarabs. In general, however, they endedup adopting the Muslim religion and customs and became the Muladis. In addition, there were minority groups such as the Berber conquerors, from the North of Africa; the Jews; and the slaves, who were pagans or converts to Islam.
 Festivities and entertainment.
 The key festivities were those that celebrated the end of fasting during Ramadan and the Feast of the Sacrifice at the end of the pilgrimage. 
 Chess and Backgammon, which originated in Persia, were played for entertainment. There were also horse parades, regattas on the Guadalquivir River, horse races, polo competitions, animal fighting, challenges and fights between horsemen, hunting and falconry, and music and dancing.
 Dress and apparel.
 Men covered their legs with baggy trousers and women with cloth bands. Both sexes wore tunics. On their feet they wore sandals, slippers, canvas shoes, ankle boots and high boots. They usually wore perfume. The men wore turbans and the women wore headdresses and scarves to cover their face when they left their homes. 
 The fabrics used were wool, cotton and linen. The use of silk raised certain controversies, as it was considered a luxury item.
 Education.
 Basic education was given in the Koranic schools where children learnt to read and write, to recite the Koran and acquired certain notions of mathematics and grammar. Learning was based on oral transmission because this was the method used in the early teachings of the prophet Mohammed.
 Higher education was provided by the madrasas or universities, access to which was much more restricted. Here, they studied the Koran as well as other subjects such as History, Philology, Mathematics, Astronomy, Medicine, and Philosophy.
 Organisation of the resistance groups.
 Government and administration.
 Eventually, the government of the Christian resistance groups passed from the initial tribal chiefs to hereditary kings or, in the case of Catalonia, to counts. During this period, the territory conquered from the Muslims was scarce and consisted basically of the Duero River Basin, but resettlement, administration and defence became necessary.
 Resettlement consisted of in stalling a new population and cultivating the land taken from the Muslims. The most widely used system was called presura or aprisio, which meant that the land could be freely occupied by peasants, monasteries and nobles, who then became the owners of that land. On other occasions, the king or count would organise them by means of municipal charters. These were written documents establishing the standards which had to be met
 by the new settlers, the distribution of the land and the privileges granted to them.
 The administration of the territory was organised into districts surround ing the castle. They were governed by delegates of the king or the count. These governors, together with the district
 inhabitants, were obliged to defend it.
 Economic activities. The cities.
  Agricultural activities were the basis of the economy. In the mountainous areas livestock farming prevailed whi le in the flat lands, cereal agriculture using the fa llow system was common.
 Crafts and trade were very scarce, and were concentrated in the few existing cities. These were very small in size when compared to Muslim cities. Most of them were religious centres where the bishop resided and the markets were held to sell the agricultural products cultivated in the surrounding reg ion. Over time, these markets attracted certain craftsmen (weavers, shoemakers, carpenters, etc.) who settled permanently in the city.
 Early in the 11th century, the three most important cities of the Christian peninsular territory were Santiago, because of the rise of pilgrimages, Lean, seat of the Bishop and, during some periods, that of the royal court, and Barcelona, where the count's palace was located.
 Christian society.
 In the resettled areas conquered from the Muslims, society was made up of numerous free peasants, who owned the land they worked. They were grouped in villages and gathered in open councils to address important issues.
 Alongside them was a small group of powerful men, formed by the nobility, who resettled large areas and were commissioned by the kings to manage and defend the territory, and the abbots of the great monasteries, which also played an important role in resettlement.
 Art in the 9th and 10th centuries. The Camino of Santiago.
 Pre-Romanesque art.
 Pre-Romanesque art includes Christian artistic manifestations prior to the arrival of Romanesque to the Peninsula. These manifestations are called Asturian and Mozarabic art.
 Asturian art.It developed between the end of the 8th and beginning of the 10th centuries in the Kingdom of Asturias. The buildings, commissioned by the king,are characterised by the use of poor materials, semicircular arches, and barrel-vault roofs, which anticipate Romanesque art. The interior decoration contained fresco paintings and coarse sculptures.Certain good examples of this art are the churches of San Julian de los Prados, San Miguel de Lillo and San
 Salvador de Valdedios. Outstanding civil architecture includes the palace of Santa Maria del Naranco, a two-story building with a barrel-vaulted ceiling, transverse rib arches, and columns carved with a rope-like relief. Metalwork in gold, precious stones and enamels was also carried out. Some examples are the Cross of the Angels and the Victory Cross.
 Mozarabic art.
 It developed in the 10th century, in the Duero valley repopulated by Christians who fled from al-Andalus. Many churches were built in this style using poor materials, Muslim-influenced 'horseshoe arches, and wooden or barrel-vaulted ceilings. Some of these are San Miguel de Esca lada (Leon), San Baudelio de Berlanga (Soria) and San Cebrian de Mazote (Valladolid). They were also decorated with miniatures from the Beatus, which were books with commentaries on the Apocalypse.
 