The European territory.
 A mosaic of kingdoms and nations.
 Chronology and basic features.
 The High Middle Ages covered the 11th, 12th and 13th centuries. This was a period of prosperity and change in Europe.
 Feudalism was maintained but the kings fought to regain power; there was progress in agriculture; cities were revived, and a new social group arose, the bourgeoisie. Culture was renewed; this gave rise to Gothic art, a new artistic style which achieved enormous popularity
 in Europe.
 The territorial framework.
 In the early 11th century, Christian Europe was still a mosaic of states and kingdoms situated between the North, Baltic and Mediterranean Seas.
 The Kingdom of France and the Holy Roman Empire in Germany were the two major political units of the time. They emerged in the 9th century, following the division of the Carolingian Empire, and were located in the centre of the continent, where they were divided into feudal territories.
 The Normans settled in the north of the Empire. In the 11th century they established stable kingdoms in southern Italy, Sicily and England. Thus, they stopped their attacks on other nations and were no longer a threat in Europe.
 In southern Europe, the Muslims and the Christians disputed the rule of the Iberian Peninsula and the territories belonging to the Byzantine Empire.
 The Slavic people were located in Eastern Europe, between the Baltic and the Black seas. They were organised into powerful principalities, like Kiev, and maintained strong cultural contact with
 Byzantium.
 Political organisation. Kings, curia and parliaments.
 The king ruled with the help of the Curia Regis, an assembly composed of nobles and prelates who served as advisors. The curia was divided into greater or lesser curia depending on the matters which were to be discussed.
 The lesser Curia Regis was attended by people close to the king such as family members and senior palace officials.
 The greater Curia Regis was attended by representatives of the higher clergy and nobility. It dealt with the most important issues such as declaring war, granting financial assistance, swearing in the heir to the throne, etc.
 From the 12th, and especially the 13th century, the representatives of certain cities were called to join the greater Curia Regis. Thus, the first of the three social classes mainly with the purpose of approving the pay of taxes or financial support.Previously, each social class would present  its petitions and requests to the king.
 With the support of the cities, the kings consolidated their power over feudal lords as they disposed of economic resources in exchange granting them certain rights and liberties.
 The Parliaments had different names in each country: Parliament, in Egland; Etats Generaux or General Assemblies, in France; Diet, in the Holy Roman Empire, and Courts, in the Christian Kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula.
 Agricultural progess.
 Technical innovations in agriculture.
 For generations, European farmers had carried out relatively low-yield agriculture. It was based on the use of the small, lightweight Roman plough, which barely cut into the ground and was dragged by oxen held by a yoke. Biennial rotation allowed soil fertility to be maintained by leaving half the farming surface fallow, or uncultivated.
 The mouldboard plough and t riennial rotation.
 Between the 11th and 13th centuries, European farming activities experienced a strong growth due to the progressive spread of technical innovations. The most important innovations were the mouldboard plough and triennial crop rotation.
 The mould board plough, or Norman plough, was made of iron and enabled the soil to be turned and aerated. It was heavier than the Roman plough; hence the need for wheels to drag it, and horses began to be used instead of oxen.
 Triennial crop rotation consisted of dividing the land into three parts. A rotation was established each year by planting cereals, oats or legumes, leaving one part fallow. This way only one third of theland was left uncultivated.
 Further developments in agriculture.
 Other technical innovations applied to agriculture in this period were the use of a collar made of leather and stuffed with straw, allowing draught animals to be attached to the plough, thus improving their strength and endurance. Another innovation was the adoption of the
 metal horseshoe, which protected the animals' hooves.
 Furthermore, the use of metal, which has greater resistance than wood, improved agricultural instruments, such as the scythe, which made harvesting cereals much easier. The watermill was perfected because it was much more efficient than the windmill, which had been used until then.
 The consequences of agricultural progress.
 The consequences of agricultural progress were varied:
 Agricultural production increased. This improved the nutrition of the population and, as a result, Europe experienced strong population growth, passing from 36 to 80 million people between the 11th and 14th centuries.
 The cultivated surface was extended, due to the demands of the growing population. Thus, the forests surrounding the villages were felled to make way for new f ields; marshes and wetlands were drained; land was won from the sea, such as in the Dutch polders, and new uncultivated areas in Eastern Europe were colonised.
 Cities were revitalised, as their populations grew quickly and became exchange centres for trades and handicrafts.
 Local and long-distance trade was reactivated.
 Medieval cities.Recovery, functions and spaces.
 Urban renaissance
 As of the 11th century, urban life was restored. This happened chiefly because of the increase of agricultural production, which provided more than the necessary goods for consumption.
 Thus, it became necessary to sell the surplus goods and exchange them for other items, which favoured the development of trade and crafts. Both of these activities were located in cities and aided in their recovery.
 In some instances, this urban renaissance affected the ancient Roman cities, which had declined after the Germanic invasions. In other cases, new cities emerged based on  marketplaces, established next to castles and monasteries along roads or at crossroads, or in coastal ports.
 Alongside these markets, neighbourhoods of craftsmen and merchants called boroughs were created, which were eventually surrounded by walls and become cities.
 The term borough was used to designate the city as a whole. Its inhabitants were called bourgeois and constituted a new social group, the bourgeoisie, who were not dependent on working the land.
 The borough or medieval city.
 The medieval boroughs were located in areas that were easy to defend.They were surrounded by walls and carried out various functions. In some, the seat of the diocese was established. Others became the county town, the location of administrative or judicial functions or
 a county. Others became important economic centres where crafts and trade flourished. Yet many others became important cultural and religious centres.
 Urban spaces and buildings complied with these diverse functions.
 Thus, the most prominent spaces were: the market, located in an open square; the cathedral, a symbol of religious power; the town hall, symbol of civil power, and other buildings, such as the houses of the guilds; the auction houses where traders made their deals; universities and hospitals.
 The rest of the city was organised into neighbourhoods, with small squares and churches. Each neighbourhood was inhabited by craftsmen belonging to the same trade and in some cases by minorities, such as the Jews. Most of the houses in these neighbourhoods were made of wood, reeds and mud, which favoured fires because only the nobles and the wealthy bourgeois could afford mansions and palaces built of stone.
 Cities were usually small, with 15000 to 50000 people. Their streets were narrow, dirty and lacked paving or sewerage systems. Because of this, rats and parasites proliferated and infectious diseases were common.
 Medieval cities. Government and economy.
 City government.
 Initially, cities depended on the lay or ecclesiastical lords of the areas where they were located.
 The abuses of theses lords led the bourgeois gentlemen to claim the right to govern themselves. They created associations, called communes, which fought to obtain a communal charter or jurisdiction from the lords or the King, which would guarantee their rights and allow them to form an autonomous government.
 Having gained their freedom, the government of the city rested on a communal council elected by the citizens. The council was responsible for collecting taxes, and supplying and defending the city. 
 The council delegated executive power to the magistrates, called mayors, judges or burgomasters, who would meet in a building which was the town or city hall. Soon these positions were seized by the richest and most influential families, thus constituting an urban aristocracy.
 Guilds and craftsmen.
 City craftsmen worked in small workshops, located in houses which were used both as homes and shops to sell their handicrafts. Those of the same trade would set themselves up on the same street, which then received the name of the trade: shoemakers, cutlers, bakers, weavers, silversmiths, etc.
 They were organised in guilds,' or associations of artisans from the same trade. The objectives of the guilds were twofold: to control production, thus avoiding competition by regulating the working hours, holidays, prices and quality of the goods, and to protect its members by paying dues to help sick members, and members' widows and orphans.
 The members of each guild fell under three categories: master craftsman, journeyman and apprentice.
 The master craftsman was the owner of the workshop and the expert in his field of handicraft.
 To reach this category, he had to have several years of experience and produce a qualifying piece of work called a 'masterpiece'. The journeyman would receive a salary for this work. The apprentice was not paid and would live with his master while he was learning the trade.
 The rise of national trade.
 Trade revived as of the 11th century. This revival was aided by the rise in both agricultural and artisanal production; the increasing amount of money available due to the discovery of silver mines; and increased security on the roads because of greater political stability. Cities were
 the major trading centres .
 Local business was conducted in the homes and workshops of the craftsmen and at weekly markets. where the farmers from the region would go to sell their surplus agricultural goods and handicrafts.
 Long-distance trade was conducted at fairs. These were yearly gatherings in certain cities where goods from distant places would be sold. The most famous fairs were the French fairs in Champagne on the land route that linked Flanders to Italy.
 The revival of long-distance trade produced prosperous commercial centres where products brought by sea from distant lands were sold. On the Mediterranean coasts the cities of Venice. Genoa. Florence.Pisa. Marseille and Barcelona were outstanding. In northern Europe,
 the main centres were LObeck, Hamburg, Ghent and Bruges. This intense commercial activ ity boosted the creation of trade associations (Hanses and guilds), payments in currency and bills of exchange, as well as the emergence of moneychangers and bankers.
 Society and eeryday life.
 The new urban society.
 The bourgeois or city dwellers constituted a new social group which ased its position on activities other than ownership and working he land. In feudal society, they were included in the social class of he workers or the third state. They were divided into several groups, acording to their wealth .
 The urban aristocracy were a minority group. It was made up of ealthy merchants, bankers and the leaders of the major guilds,who took over control of city government.
 The commoners included the rest of the urban population. t consisted of the master craftsmen of the guilds and small raders, who formed an intermediate group.
  Then there were the rban masses, composed of journeymen and guild apprentices,
 servants, and the poor and marginalised jobless who survived by bgging.
 In some cities, there were also minorities like the Jews, who lived i separate neighbourhoods called Jewish quarters or aljamas. The Jews were engaged in lending, trade, specialised handicrafts and medicine.
 Women in urban society.
 In cities, women often shared the occupation of their fathers or husbands and were barmaids, saleswomen and craftswomen of varied trades. Thus, some became goldsmiths and silversmiths,painters, miniature illustrators, blacksmiths and construction workers;
 as masons, they would prepare bricks and tiles, knead plaster, clear
 debris and carry materials.
 Other trades carried out by women included washerwomen, ironers, actresses, singers, dancers, healers and midwives.
 Everyday life in cities.
 Life in the city evolved on its streets and squares. These were noisy and busy places where the daily work of craftsmen and street trading took place. All kinds of people could be found on them: workers, puppeteers, jugglers, minstrels, beggars, the sick, the mentally ill and newcomers. These newcomers were in some cases serfs who had fled from their masters: if they remained in a city for a year and a day they became free citizens and would no longer be bound to their former relationship with the feudal lord.
 On feast days, cities were cleaned, the streets covered with straw and reeds, and tapestries and drapes were hung from the windows. For enjoyment, the men would go to taverns where they would talk, play cards and dice, eat and drink. All the city dwellers would wear their best clothes and take part in processions, games and dances organised by the guilds.
 Cultural and religious renewal.
 Urban culture. Schools and universities.
 The revival of culture in this period was focused in the cities where schools and universities were founded.
 There were two kinds of urban schools. The cathedral schools were controlled by the Church and were centred on religious studies.
 The municipal schools were public and offered more varied studies:reading, writing, accounting law and medicine .
 Universities emerged in the middle of the 12th century and were promoted by bishops and kings. They were organised like a guild of teachers and students in order to defend their interests. Studies were divided into four specialties or faculties: Liberal Arts, Medicine, Law
 and Theology. Teaching was carried out in Latin and followed the Scholastic model, called Scholasticism, which consisted of reading a text, raising a problem, discussing it and finally taking a decision. The most famous medieval universities were those in Paris, Oxford and
 Bologna .
 Religiosity and enemies of the faith.
 During the High Middle Ages, Christian Europe fought in the name of its faith. Crusades were organised against the Muslims and the Inquisition and the mendicant orders were used to combat heresies.
 Crusades and military orders.
 The Crusades were military expeditions organised to expel the Muslims from the Holy Land, which were the territories where Jesus lived his life. They were convened by the Pope, and knights and contenders from diverse Christian kingdoms participated in them. The first Crusade was summoned by Pope Urban 11 during the Council of Clermont in 1095. Overall, between the 11th and 13th centuries, eight Crusades were conducted with mixed results.
 The defence of the territory conquered by the Crusaders in the Holy Land and the protection of the pilgrims who would come to visit them were entrusted to the military orders. These were religious and military militias whose members were subject to vows of obedience, poverty
 and chasti t y. The most prominent amongst them were the Knights Templar, the Knights Hospitaller and the Order of the Holy Sepulchre.
 The Inquisition and the mendicant orders.
 In the 12th and 13th centuries various heresies or doctrines contrary to the teachings of the Church appeared. Some of these created important religious movements such as the Waldensians and Albigensians or Cathars, which spread mainly in France.
 In response to these movements and to combat them, the Church created the Court of the Inquisition in 1230, which tried and judged crimes against the faith. Furthermore, the Church intensified the preaching of the new religious orders like the Dominicans and the
 Franciscans, who taught in cities and lived on alms. This is why they are known as the mendicant orders.
 