 Spatial distribution of the world's population.
  Population and demographic sources. 
 Population is the total number of inhabitants in a territory. It is studied in a number of scientific fields, such as demography, geography, sociology and economics. 
 Geography studies the characteristics of a population within the area it inhabits, or in other words, the distribution, evolution, movements and structure of its members. To do so, information from a range of sources is used. The most comprehensive is that provided by the United Nations Population Division.
 The unequal distribution of the population. 
 In 2014, the Earth had a population of 7238 billion people. Population distribution is analysed according to population density, which links the total number of inhabitants in a territory, or absolute population, to the area it occupies in square kilometres. A population density map shows how this distribution is very uneven, as there are contrasting areas of dense population and sparse population.
 The main areas of dense population are South and Southeast Asia, Western and Central Europe, and the East Coast of the United States. There are also smaller densely populated areas in some river valleys, such as the Nile; along some coasts, such as the Atlantic coast of Brazil, Mexico and the Maghreb; and in areas with mineral resources and energy sources.
  The main areas of sparse population coincide with the Poles and frigid zones; high mountain regions, such as the Himalayas and the Rocky Mountains; deserts such as the Sahara and the Arabian, Namibian, Kalahari, Atacama and Australian Deserts; and the major equatorial forests.
 Distribution factors. 
 The unequal distribution of the Earth's population is caused by both physical and human factors. The most influential physical factors are terrain, climate, water and soil types. People prefer to settle in areas with flat terrain and a temperate climate near to the sea, with fresh water, fertile soil and mineral and energy sources. 
 The most influential human factors are historic, political and economic. As such, the history of Asian and European populations explains their high density. Political decisions, such as wars and border changes force populations to move and create demographic voids and concentrations. The economy also explains why, in underdeveloped countries with an agrarian economy, the population is concentrated in areas of agricultural wealth and fertile soils and why, in developed countries with an industrial and service-sector economy, the population settles in the most favourable areas for these activities, such as cities, beaches, ports and major mining areas, etc.
 Mortatity. 
 Thee death, or mortality rate, is the number of deaths that occur in a population over the course of a year. It is measured by using three rates the death rate, the infant mortality rate and the life expectancy rate.
 Spatial differences.
 In 2014, the world's average death rate was 8%, which is a low figure. In this case, the differences between countries are less pronounced. 
 In general, the mortality rate tends to fall  in less developed countries, to rise in more developed  ones, given their high life expectancy and ageing population. 
 Explanatory factors.
 There are likewise a number of factors that explain these differences between countries: biological factors, such as genetic factors or gender, since woman live longer than men; demographic and socioeconomic factors, such as the percentage of young or elderly people, income, profession, cultural level, lifestyle and diet; and political factors, such as the provision, or lack of, public sanitation and access to clean drinking water, and a welfare state that guarantees health care.
 The rate of natural increase and the evolution of global population.
 The rate of natural increase and its differences .
 A population's rate of natural increase is the difference between the birth rate and the mortality rate. The increase is positive when births outnumber deaths, and negative in the reverse scenario. 
 Today, there are major contrasts between the increases of different countries. In the more developed countries, there is generally a weak natural increase, and on occasions, it can even be negative, as the mortality rate is higher than the birth rate. Less developed countries have a high rate of natural increase, as they sustain high birth rates and their mortality rates tend to fall.
 An explanatory model: demographic transition theory. 
 The situation of the world today and the demographic evolution of humanity can be explained by demographic transition theory. According to this theory, demographic evolution moves through three demographic regimes, which are distinguished by their birth, death and natural increase rates. 
 The pre-industrial demographic regime.  The birth rate is high, while the fertility rate is classed as  natural since no contraceptive methods are used and children are needed to assist their parents. 80th general and infant mortality rates are also high, given the poor diet, health care and hygiene. Thereby, life expectancy is low (between 33 and 35 years old) As a result, the rate of natural  increase of the population is low. 
 Up until 1750, all countries on Earth were in this situation. Therefore, until that date, the world's population increase was low. 
 Demographic transition 
 This is divided into two phases and is distinguished by a marked demographic increase. 
 In the first phase, the birth rate continues to be high. However, in contrast, the death rate falls sharply given an improved diet, health care and hygiene. As a result, the rate of natural increase is very high. 
 In the second phase, the birth rate begins to fall, as a result of efforts to control the number of births; the shift towards an urban, industrial and service-sector economy and the provision of unemployment and sickness benefits, as well as pensions, etc. At the same time, the death rate continues to fall, whereby the rate of natural increase is lower, although clearly positive. 
 Today's developed countries went through this demographic transition between 1750 and 1950.
 The majority of the developed countries entered into the first phase of the transition between 1950 and 1975, following the spread of medical developments and sanitation from developed countries. At present, only the least developed countries remain at this initial phase, as emerging countries began the second phase of the transition from 1975 onwards. 
 The result of this evolution was extraordinary worldwide population growth between 1950 and 1975, which is known as the demographic explosion.
 The modern demographic regime.
 The birth and fertility rates are low, owing to the use of contraceptives, the postponement of motherhood, women’s employment outside home and the cost of bringing up a family.
 Both the general and the infant mortality rates are low given the high quality of diet, health care and sanitation, and life expectancy is high (over 70 years old). Therefore, the rate of natural increase is lower.
 This is the regime encountered in developed countries since 1950, and more recently in China and the majority of Latin American countries. This fact produces a deceleration of the global population growth rate, although it will still take some years to become apparent.
 The composition of a population.
 The composition or structure of a population tells us about its internal characteristics: gender, age, civil status, level of education, forms of employment, etc. Geography is above all interested in biological structure, or population composition based on gender and age, as well as economic structure, or the relationship of the population to the sectors of the economy that we will study in later units.
 Composition according to gender.
 Gender composition is the ratio of men to women in a population. It is measured according to male and female birth rates. 
 In 2015, there were 101.7 men for every 100 women in the world. Males predominate in the younger group, as more males are born. However, the proportion of women increases with age, as life expectancy is usually higher for the jobs traditionally carried out by women, as well as being influenced by their reduced participation in wars, and until recently, the fact that they led a healthier life style.
 Composition according to age. 
 Age composition is the percentage of the young (aged 0-14), adult (aged 15-64) and elderly (aged 65 and over) populations in a society. Today, the Earth has an overall adult population, with a moderate percentage of young and elderly people (26 % and 8.2 %, respectively, in 2015). However, there are major differences worldwide: 
 Young populations are typical of underdeveloped countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia and Latin America, which are beginning their demographic transition. This leads to the rapid growth of their populations and serious problems such as malnutrition, illiteracy and high unemployment, which favour social unrest and emigration. 
 Adult populations are typical of emerging countries in Asía and Latin America, which are in an advanced phase of demographic transition. This situation explains their moderate demographic growth and their abundant working-age labour force. 
 Ageing populations are typical of wealthy countries in Europe and of the United States, Canada and Japan, which have completed demographic transition. This situation leads to low demographic growth, which results in a lack of workforce and high expenditure on pensions, health care and social services for the elderly. 
 Age pyramids. 
 The gender and age composition for a place during a certain year is often represented as a graph in the form of an age pyramid. This reflects whether a population is young, mature or ageing, and its recent demographic history, such as migration, wars and whether or not it uses birth control, etc.
 Migratory movements . Internal migration.
  Migration and migrants. 
 Migrations are movemets made by the population from one geographical region to another. 
 Emigration is the departure of a population from one place to another, while immigration is the arrival of people at a new place. The difference between immigration and emigration is the net migration rate, the value of which can be positive or negative. 
 There are various types of migrants, the people who undertake migrations. They are identified by: 
 Their method of entry. Migrants can enter a country legally, if they have permission or a work contract, or illegally, if they enter in a clandestine manner. Also, if a person believes their safety is threatened in their home country, they can apply for asylum or refugee status. 
 Their education or skills. Many unqualified or ill-qualified migrants work in tough, poorly-paid jobs Qualified or highly-qualified migrants do more specialised and better-paid jobs. 
 The causes behind migration.
 There is a wide range of causes behind migration: 
 Being forced to leave places of origino This can be due to natural causes such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, droughts, flooding or harsh climates; political causes, such as wars, forced displacement and political, religious or racial persecution; and economic causes, such as overpopulation, employment shortages and a lack of health and education services. 
 The appeal of the destination. This can also be due to natural causes such as favourable physical and climatic conditions; political causes, such as a peaceful society; and, above all, economic causes, such as better employment opportunities and social advantages. 
 Internal migration. 
 Internal migration is the movement of a population within a state. The most important example is the rural exodus, or emigration from the countryside to the city. 
 In the past, the rural exodus mainly affected the most developed countries. It was caused by the mechanisation of agricultural work and the growth of the industrial and service sectors. It led to rural depopulation and ageing, as well as urban population growth. 
 Today, above all, it affects the least developed countries. It is caused by major demographic increases and poor rural living conditions. It leads to an accelerated growth of cities and related housing problems and a lack of services, precarious labour conditions, poverty and social marginalisation.  
 