 Basic components of the physical environment.The Earth's layers.
  The structure of the Earth. 
 The Earth's structure consists of a series of concentric layers. Each one has a different thickness and is formed of different materials. From the interior to the exterior of the Earth, these layers are: the core, which is made particularly of iron; the mantle, which is composed of an upper layer of solid matter, which becomes partially molten at a certain depth; and the crust, which is a thin layer of rocks and soil. 
 The Earth's other outer layers are the hydrosphere, which consists of all the water on the planet's surface; the atmosphere or the gaseous layer; and finally, the biosphere or life sphere, which is the thin layer that is inhabited by living beings. 
 The Iithosphere and its characteristics. 
 Geography is especially interested in the study of the outer solid layer of the Earth, which is called the lithosphere. The lithosphere is made up of the crust and the upper part of the mantle. 
 Among the features of the Iithosphere, the following are of particular importance: 
 It is fragmented into large blocks. These blocks are referred to as tectonic plates, and they move slowly apart or collide with one another. They move on top of the mantle layer. The movements of the plates are responsible for the separation of the continents, the formation of mountains, volcanic eruptions and earthquakes. 
 The lithosphere has many irregularities. The Earth's surface has raised areas, low Iying areas, slopes, etc. These forms make up the Earth's relief. 
 The relief is of variable thickness. The crust beneath the oceans is thinner (up to 12 km thick) and it is submerged beneath the water of the oceans and seas. By contrast, the crust located beneath the continents is thicker (up to 35 and 50 km). It is raised above sea level and shapes the land located above sea level. 
 Continents and islands. 
 Twenty-nine per cent of the Earth's surface is located above sea level, and it is made up of continents and islands. The continents are large extensions of land above sea level that are surrounded by oceans and seas.
 There are six continents, and in order of size from the largest to the smallest they are: Asia, America, Africa, Antarctica, Europe and Oceania. Islands are areas of land above sea level that are surrounded by water and are smaller than the continents. In some cases, they form groups of islands called archipelagos, such as the Antilles and Falkland Islands. Some, like Greenland, cover a large area, whereas others, such as Malta, are very small.
 Basic components of the physical environment .Types of terrain.
 Landforms of surface relief. 
 The relief found on the continents and islands has four basic forms: 
 Plains are extensive areas of flat or gently undulating land. They are located at an altitude of less than 200 metres above sea level. For example, the Great European Plain or the Great Plains in North America. 
 Plateaus are elevated plains. They are located at altitudes of more than 200 metres above sea level. The Tibetan Plateau, in Asia, is located at more than 2000 metres above sea level. Mountains are very high areas of relief. They have steep slopes and an altitude of more than 600 metres. Some are old (old massifs) and they have rounded forms; others are young and have pointed forms. Mountains tend to be grouped into large groups, called ranges or sierras. 
 Depressions are sunken areas. They occur when a block of the Earth's core sinks. They often provide the routes followed by rivers. The rivers in turn excavate elongated depressions called valleys. They can also be filled by lakes, such as the Caspian Sea, which is the world's largest lake. 
 Landforms below sea level. 
 The land below the waters of the oceans and the seas also reveals a range of forms of relief: 
 The continental shelf is a gentle slope that extends from the continents beneath the sea waters. The sea here is shallow (200 metres). It ends in a pronounced step, the continental margin, which connects the continental slope with the abyssal plain. 
 Abyssal plains are marine depths located at a depth of between 4000 and 5000 metres. They are a flat terrain, but marked by oceanic ridges or under-water mountain systems, and also by oceanic trenches or narrow, elongated depressions. 
    Coastal relief. 
 The coasts are areas of contact between the surface of the continents and the oceans and seas. Depending on their height in relation to the sea, they can be low-Iying, or raised with cliffs. They also reveal a number of forms of relief. 
 Beaches are the flat surfaces found along the sea shore. They are formed by the accumulation of sediments such as sand or stones. 
 Capes or headlands are the areas where the coast juts into the sea; gulfs are where the sea is partially enclosed by the land. 
 Estuaries are river valleys which have been flooded by the sea, and fjords are glacial valleys that have been flooded by the sea. 
 Peninsulas are extensions of land surrounded by water on all sides except one. This last side is called the isthmus and it links the peninsula to the continent.
 How is the Earth's relief formed and modified?
 The evolution of the types of relief. 
 As you now know, the Earth's relief is a combination of forms encountered on the planet's surface. It has taken millions of years for these forms to be created and they are the result of a slow evolution. 
 During this evolution, phases of relief formation have alternated with phases of relief modification. Relief formation is the result of internal forces and relief modification is the result of erosive agents.
  Relief formation and its agents. 
 Relief is formed by the Earth's own forces, or its internal agents. These forces create the basic forms or structure of relief by raising, sinking or moving blocks or sediment. The main internal agents that form relief are orogenesis, earthquakes and volcanoes. 
 Orogenesis is the process of forming mountains. It occurs in areas where the lithosphere's tectonic plates come into contact with or separate from one another.
 Earthquakes are also referred to as seismic activity. They are sudden movements of the Earth's crust caused by the clash of two tectonic plates, or when a rock is subjected to very high levels of pressure.
 Volcanoes are ruptures in the Earth's core through which magma and gases from the Earth's inner core are released onto the surface. They are mostly located in areas where there is contact between tectonic plates. 
 Relief modification and its agents. 
 Relief modification is caused by the activity of external forces or agents, which leads to: the erosion or wearing down of types of relief, the movement of eroded materials, and the sedimentation or accumulation of these eroded materials in specific areas. 
 The principal external agents are atmospheric elements, water and living beings. 
 Atmospheric elements. Temperature, when there are rapid changes of heat and cold rocks expand and contract, they crack. Rainfall penetrates the cracks in the rocks and when it freezes, the water
 expands and breaks the rocks. Wind also erodes rocks, breaking them down into small fragments or sand. The wind then moves the sand and it becomes sediment. 
 Water. In a liquid or solid state, it dissolves certain components of the rocks, as well as eroding the relief by excavating valleys and ravines. It also transports eroded materials and turns them into sediment or deposits. 
 Living beings. Vegetation and animals cause slight modifications as their roots or movements break rocks. Human activity modifies the Earth's relief at the fastest rate and has the most long-Iasting effects. For example, by mining or building motorways, railways and reservoirs.
 The hydrosphere.
 The Earth's water. 
 The hydrosphere is the combination of all the waters to be found on Earth. It forms one of the Earth's exterior fluid layers and includes the marine waters and continental waters. 
 Marine waters represent just over 97.5 % of the planet's total amount of water. They are made up of the oceans and seas, with over approximately 71 % of the Earth's surface. 
 Continental waters are usually fresh water, and they only account for the remaining of the planet's water. They include rivers, lakes, glaciers and subterranean waters.
 The water cycle.
 Water is essential for life. On the Earth in a state of permanent circulation. It exists in an  undergoing a continual cycle that is known as the water cycle. The two fundamental processes of this cycle are evaporation and precipitation. 
 Evaporation is the change of water from a liquid to a gas. It is caused by solar energy. Evaporation
 converts the surface water of the oceans and seas into atmospheric vapour.
 When water rises in the form of vapour, it cools, condenses and forms clouds, which the winds then blow across the continents. Evaporation from the continental waters, vegetation and the ground combines with these clouds too.
 Precipitation is the fall of water onto the Earth's surface in the form of rain, snow or hail.
 It occurs when the drops of water in the clouds combine with one another and increase in size and weight. When they reach a diameter larger than 0.5 mm they cannot be supported in the air, and they fall due to the force of gravity. The Earth's vegetation uses up some of the water that falls on the Earth for its own sustenance; some of it filters into the subsoil, where it forms aquifers or subterranean reservoirs. Some of the water remains on the surface as surface water flow, su eh as rivers, or supplies the lakes. Finally, most of the water that falls as precipitation returns to the sea, from where it will once more evaporate and begin a new cycle.
    
   Salt water and fresh water.
  The marine waters. Oceans and seas. 
 Marine waters are the oceans and seas. 
 Oceans are large masses of salt water. The Earth has five oceans. They are, in order of size from the largest to the smallest, the Pacific, the Atlantic, the Indian, the Arctic and the Antarctic. 
 Seas are areas of the oceans that are close to the coastline and are shallower. For historical or cultural reasons, they have their own name.
  The water of the oceans and seas is characterised by two features: 
 It is salt water, as it has sodium chloride and other salts dissolved in it.
 It is constantly moving due to the waves or undulating movement on the sea's surface; the tides or the rise and fall of the sea level; and the marine currents that move through the oceans.
 Continental waters.
 The majority of the continental waters are fresh water. They include ice from glaciers, the surface water of rivers and lakes and subterranean water. 
 Glaciers are large accumulations of ice. They are found in the North Pole, Greenland and Antarctica, as well as on the highest mountains.
 Rivers are continuous currents of water that flow along a course or riverbed. The majority begin as springs or subterranean sources of water and they are supplied by rainfall or the melting of snow. They flow into the sea or another river or lake. 
 Lakes are accumulations of water in low-Iying areas of the Earth's crust. The water is supplied by rainfall or rivers and subterranean water. Some lakes are so big that they are referred to as 'seas', for example, the Caspian Sea. 
 Aquifers are subterranean reserves of water. They are formed by the infiltration of water from the Earth's surface. The water accumulates deep below the surface when it reaches an impermeable stratum.
 