The major bioclimatic zones: the torrid zone.
 General characteristics. 
 The torrid zone is roughly located between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn. Its most significant feature is its high average temperature, which is always above 18 ºC. 
 There are three types of torrid climate: equatorial, tropical and desert. They each have different precipitation levels. The torrid desert bioclimate is azonal and is found in various regions around the world. We will therefore study it separately. 
 The equatorial bioclimate.
 The equatorial bioclimate covers the narrow strip to the north and south of the equator. 
 Temperatures there are constantly high, at around 25 oC all year round. The atmospheric temperature range Cthe difference in temperature between the hottest and coldest months) is approximately 3 ºC.
 Annual precipitation levels exceed 1500 mm and the amount of precipitation is distributed regularly over the year. Therefore, there is just one hot and humid season. As a result, equatorial rivers are regular and have a high volume of water. 
 Vegetation in the equatorial climate is characterised by rainforest, also known as jungle. It consists of dense woodland, which remains green all year round. It consists of many different vegetation species, which are distributed at different heights and therefore compete for light and space.
 The tropical bioclimate. 
 Tropical bioclimate extends from the equatorial zone to the edges of the two tropics. Temperatures do not fall below 18 ºC. and atmospheric temperature range varies between 3 ºC and 10ºC. Precipitation levels are high, ranging from 750 to 1500 mm a year. Nertheless, the amount of rainfall is irregular: there is a summer rainy season and a winter dry season.
 This bioclimate is divided into two subtypes: the humid tropical zone, in which the dry season lasts three months or less; and the dry tropical zone or savannah, where it lasts more than three months. As a result, the water levels in rivers vary greatly across the seasons.
 Dominant vegetation depends on precipitation levels. In the more humid zones, there is tropical woodland, which is less dense and taller than equatorial woodland. Savannah is found in areas with a prolonged dry season. It consists of tall grasses, which are mainly graminaceous species that grow during the wet season and die during the dry season. Scrub plants and trees with a horizontally spreading crown, such as the acacia and baobab, also grow there.
 The major bioclimatic zones: the temperate zone.
 The temperate zone is located between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn and the polar circles. Its most significant feature is the ::ontrast in temperature across the different seasons. In addition to the desert, which we will study in section 3, there are three temperate bioclimates: Mediterranean, oceanic and continental.
 The Mediterranean bioclimate. 
 The Mediterranean bioclimate is located around the Mediterranean Sea and in areas of Western America, Africa and Australia. There is little contrast in climatic temperature, since it is close to the sea. The winters are mild and summers are warm or hot (over 22 ºC). Precipitation levels are moderate, at between 300 and 800 mm per year. They are also irregular and there is a summer dry season. The rivers have a low volume and low water level in the summer. 
 The characteristic vegetation is Mediterranean woodland. This consists of small, perennial trees with coarse bark and small leaves. Examples include holm oak, cork and pine. There are also numerous shrubs, such as kermes oak, rock rose, thyme, rosemary, etc. 
 The oceanic bioclimate. 
 It is located along the western border of the continents. Climatic temperatures are fairly constant and moderate, given the influence of the sea. As a result, winters are not particularly cold (never falling below -3º C) and summers are cool (not going above an average of 22 ºC). Precipitation levels are high, at over 800 mm per year. They are also regular and there is no dry season or month. The rivers have a constantly high volume of water. The characteristic vegetation is deciduous woodland. It is made up of tall trees (oak, beech) with straight trunks and large leaves that fall in autumn. In colder areas, or areas, where woodland has been destroyed, vegetation consists of scrubland and grass meadows. 
 The continental bioclimate. 
 The continental bioclimate is located in inland continental regions. 
 There is a contrast in the climatic temperatures owing to the distance from the sea. Winters are very cold (temperatures can fall below -3 ºC),and summers are warm or hot. Precipitation levels are moderate (300-800 mm) and tend to fall in summer and appear as snow in the winter. The rivers freeze in winter and their levels rise in spring, when  the water melts. They have a high volume of water in summer. 
 Vegetation varies according to latitude and precipitation levels. From north to south, this bioclimate includes taiga, or coniferous woodland with trees that have needle-shaped leaves (pine and fir trees), along with grassland, consisting of high grasses. This kind of vegetation diminishes when precipitation levels fall, creating steppes.
 Desert bioclimates.
 Torrid and temperate deserts. 
 The desert bioclimate extends across torrid and temperate zones and covers around 30 % of the Earth's landmass. 
 In the torrid zone, it is located near the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn. The dry conditions found there result from permanent high pressure. One example is the Sahara. 
 In the temperate zone, desert conditions are found in the inland areas of the continents. This type of desert is arid, owing to continental conditions such as an excessive distance from the sea (the Gobi Desert) and mountainous terrain, which prevents the movement of oceanic humidity (the Patagonian Desert). 
 Arid desert climates. 
 All desert climates are characterised by aridity and irregular precipitation. 
 There are marked contrasts in temperature. In torrid tropical deserts, temperatures are high all year long and the sharpest contrasts are between the daytime and night-time temperatures. In temperate deserts, temperatures vary throughout the year: summers are very hot and winters are very cold. 
 These contrasts are due to the lack of atmospheric humidity, which causes high daytime temperatures at ground level and rapid cooling at night. 
 Precipitation levels are low and irregular in al! deserts. As a result, absolute deserts receive less than 150 mm of rainfall per year and all months are dry. Meanwhile, on the steppes or semiarid edges of deserts, there are least seven dry months, with precipitation levels ranging from 750 to 150 mm. Therefore, water only runs in the rivers after precipitation. The rest of the time they remain dry. 
 Desert vegetation. 
 Vegetation is scarce in deserts and has to adapt to aridity. As a result, the roots of plants spread across the surface or reach deep below the ground, in order to capture surface and subterranean water. They develop fleshy stems to store water and have small leaves or spikes, designed to reduce evaporation. They can germinate with very light rain and produce seeds, which will sprout with the next rainfall. 
 Desert vegetation is low-Iying and spread out. Cacti and thorny shrubs are the predominate species. It is only in oases, where water and abundant vegetation may be found, for example in the palm groves of torrid deserts. 
 On the steppes, low-Iying grasses and isolated shrubs predominate.
 The major bioclimatic zones: the frigid zone.
 Geographical distribution. 
 The polar bioclimates are located between the Arctic and Antarctic Circles and their corresponding North and South Poles. Their main features are harsh cold, limited light, and low precipitation levels. They cover an extensive area, which constitutes approximately 28 % of the Earth's landmass. They are divided into two different zones. 
 The glacial environment covers the polar ice caps, an area ranging from the 75th parallel to the North and South Poles. In the northern hemisphere, this region includes Greenland, and in the south, the majority of Antarctica. 
 The periglacial environment, or edges of the polar regions, extends as far as the 75th parallel. In the northern hemisphere, this includes the far northern regions of North America, Europe and Asia, while in the southern hemisphere, it encompasses the far southern regions of Chile and Argentina, and various islands. 
 The polar climate: dominant cold. 
 The polar climate has very low temperatures all year round. The average temperature there never reaches 10 º C. However, there are differences between the polar ice caps, where temperatures are always below O ºC, and the outer limit of the poles, where in summer temperatures rise above O ºC The cause of these low temperatures is the sharp angle of the rays of the Sun all year round. 
 Precipitation generally falls as snow, although it is scarce, with levels below 250-300 mm per year on the outer limits of the two poles. There is almost no precipitation on the polar ice caps. The reason for this is the intense cold, which favours the formation of anticyclones. However, it is not arid given the low temperatures. 
 Liquid water is only present in the periglacial environment when temperatures rise above O ºC. Then, large areas of surface water form on the permanently frozen subsoil, also known as permafrost. 
 Polar vegetation. 
 In the glacial environment, there is no vegetation as all the surface is permanently covered by ice. 
 In the periglacial environment, vegetation has to adapt to very harsh conditions: long periods with little light, very low winter temperatures, strong winds, and poor, flooded soil. These characteristics prevent tree growth. 
 Tundra is the predominant vegetation. It is composed of very lowIying plants, such as mosses and lichens, which take advantage of the short summer in order to germinate in the flooded soil and produce roots and leaves. 
 Some shrubs, such as dwarf willows, can also grow to be several metres wide, however they do not grow over 10 cm tall.
 The major bioclimatic zones: mountains.
 Torrid and temperate mountains.The mountain bioclimate, like the desert climate, is azonal, that is, it can be found at any latitude. 
 It comprises two zones, one of low mountains and one of high mountains or alpine. It begins where the average temperature does not rise aboye 10 oC and tree growth is impossible. 
 Climate in high-altitude environments Mountainous areas have a different climate to those that surround them, because their high altitude modifies a number of climatic elements. 
 The temperature drops by approximately 0.6 ºC for every 100 metres above sea level.
 Precipitation increases. In general, precipitation is abundant until you reach 1000 to 2000 metres. After this height, it decreases given the increasingly dry air. 
 In alpine zones, precipitation frequently falls as snow. The rivers are low in winter and their volume 
 of water increases with snowmelt. 
 The climatic differences between mountainous zones and adjacent regions are less marked in the torrid zone and greater in the temperate zone. Furthermore, in the temperate zone, the slopes with sunlit aspects have higher temperatures with greater daytime and nocturnal thermal contrasts than shaded aspects. This applies throughout the year. 
 Mountain vegetation. 
 Vegetation has to adapt to harsh conditions. This results in altitudinal zones that change at intervals from the base of mountains to their peaks. First, there is woodland; then, scrubland and pastures; and, finally, moss and lichens. After a certain height, vegetation is replaced by rock and constant snow. 
 Woodland plant species vary according to latitude. Equatorial rainforest and tropical woodland is found on mountains in the torrid zone. Meanwhile, in mountains located in the temperate zone, there is deciduous woodland, with oak trees and beeches, and coniferous woodland, with pine and fir trees.
 The alpine zone and the perpetual snowline (the altitude above which temperatures never exceed 10 ºC and O ºC, respectively) begin at different points on every mountain. 
 In torrid mountain regions they are higher, as the alpine zone begins at an altitude of around 3000-3500 metres and the constant snowline begins at 4500-5000 metres. 
 In temperate mountain regions they are lower, as the alpine zone begins at an altitude of around 2000-2500 metres and the constant snowline begins at 3000 metres.
 Human impact on the environment.
 Human beings form part of the natural environment and they use this environment to obtain resources to satisfy their needs. However, human activities produce changes in the natural environment and have given rise to environmental problems that may put the future of the planet at risk.
 Problems that affect vegetation and soil. 
 As 51 % of the land on Earth is covered by ice and snow, or by deserts and alpine regions, only a limited number of areas of the planet can sustain agriculture and livestock farming. As a result, inappropriate human practices, such as deforestation, can cause the limited soil available to erode. 
 Deforestation consists of removing plants and trees and burning or felling forests, in order to gain land for agricultural and livestock farming, residential use, supplying timber to industries and collecting firewood for cooking and heating. As a result, soil erosion increases, since the fertile layer of the soil is lost and undergoes desertification. 
 These two problems affect the whole planet. Since 1950, almost one third of the Earth's forest areas have been lost and 500 million hectares have suffered desertification. 
 Problems affecting water on Earth.
 Water sources are often overexploited and become polluted. 
 Overexploitation is the excessive consumption of fresh water as a result of agrarian, urban and industrial use. As a result, the volume of water in rivers drops, as does the volume of water in lakes and aquifers. This problem particularly affects semiarid environments. 
 The pollution of fresh and saltwater sources is caused by chemical products used in agriculture, untreated industrial and urban waste, as well as accidents and oil slicks from oil tankers. The worst affected water sources are sections of river and coast near industrial and urban areas, enclosed seas such as the Mediterranean, and the waters of major global shipping routes. 
 Atmospheric problems. 
 The atmosphere is affected by a range of problems caused by human ' activity. These problems include global warming and pollution. 
 Global warming is caused by the increasing greenhouse effect, produced by excessive CO2 emissions and emissions of other gases that cause the average temperature of the Earth to rise. 
 Atmospheric pollution is the result of harmful emissions from power stations, central heating systems, industry and transport. Amongst other consequences, it causes acid rain and reduces the ozone layer of the atmosphere.
 Solutions to global environmental problems.
 The UN and Earth Summits.
 The serious nature of environmental problems has led the UN to hold a number of international conferences focused on the environment. 
 The first one, which addressed a broad and systematic approach to protecting the environment, was the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm in 1972. Since then, other summits have been held and have established the principle of sustainable development, set international agreements and laid the foundations for international environmental law. Furthermore, they have created protected natural spaces worldwide.
 The principle of sustainable development. 
 The principle of sustainable development was set out at the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit in 1992. It aims to achieve economic growth and foster social well-being in the present, without compromising the well-being of future generations. To this end, it promotes the rational use of natural resources and conservation of the environment. 
 In order to apply this principle, the policies that countries must adopt are as follows: not using renewable resources more rapidly than they can be renewed; not consuming non-renewable resources more quickly than necessary, in order to give us time to substitute them with renewable resources; and not producing pollutants more quickly than it takes to recycle them or for them to be absorbed by the environment.
 International agreements and law. 
 Various international agreements have been signed in an attempt to stop climate change (the Kyoto Protocol); to prevent further reduction of the ozone layer (the Montreal Protocol); to limit acid rain (the Geneva Convention); to protect wetlands (the Ramsar Convention) and to fight desertification (the Convention to Combat Desertifícation). 
 International Environmental Law has established rules that all countries should adopt. These include using resources that do not damage the natural environments of other places, combating shared environmental problems and applying international environmental law.
 Creating protected natural spaces. 
 In order to protect natural spaces at a global level, in 1976 UNESCO created the Global Network of Biosphere Reserves, which includes mainland, coastal and marine ecosystems, as well as different combinations of these. These reserves adhere to the principle of sustainable development: they harmonise the preservation of unique natural environments with human presence and economic activities.
 