The universe, the solar system and the Earth .
 The Earth, a tiny dot in the universe.
 The universe was formed some 13 700 million years ago. According to astronomers, it was the result of an explosion (the Big Bang) of a small mass that contained all existing matter and energy. The universe is formed of stars and celestial bodies, interstellar matter (dust and gas) and the space that separates all these elements. 
 In the universe, the stars are grouped together in the form of galaxies or groups of stars. For example, the Milky Way is the galaxy that contains the Earth. Each galaxy can contain thousands of millions of stars and many planetary systems. These planetary systems consist of a number of cellestial bodies (planets, satellites, asteroids and comets) that move around a star. 
 The solar system is the planetary system to which the Earth belongs. It was formed around 5000 million years ago, and it includes the Sun, which is a star of an average size, eight planets (one of which is the Earth) and numerous satellites, asteroids and comets. The Moon is the Earth's only satellite. Therefore, we can say that the Earth is a tiny dot in the immense universe. 
 The Earth, a unique planet. 
 The Earth was formed around 4600 million years ago. It is the only planet in the solar system where there is life. Life on Earth began around 2000 million years ago in the form of bacteria and algae. This was possible because the Earth has three characteristics that distinguish it from the others in our solar system: 
 The temperature is moderate, because the Earth is at just the right distance from the Sun: around 150 million kilometres. 
 The atmosphere, or gaseous layer that surrounds our planet, contains gases, such as oxygen, which are essential for life. In addition to this atmosphere protects the Earth from dangerous solar radiation and helps to regulate its temperature. 
 There is an abundant supply of liquid water. Water, in the form of oceans and seas, covers a large part of the Earth's surface. This is why the Earth appears to be a blue planet when seen from space. The Earth is the only planet in the solar system that has water on its surface in a permanently liquid state. 
 The size and shape of the Earth. 
 The Earth has a surface area of 510 million km2, a thousand times the area of Spain. However, in the universe as a whole, and when compared to other celestial bodies, our planet is in fact small. The Sun, for example, is one million three hundred thousand times bigger than the Earth. 
 The shape of the Earth is referred to as a geoid or an imperfect sphere. In other words, it is slightly wider at the equator than at the poles.
 How the Earth moves .Rotation.
 The rotation of the Earth.
 The universe is continually moving, and so are all the celestial bodies it contains. For example, the Milky Way spins round its central point. It completes a full rotation every 255 million years. Our solar system spins around the centre of the Milky Way. 
 The Earth is also continually moving. It moves in two ways: rotation and revolution. 
 The Earth's rotation refers to the way it spins as if on an imaginary axis that extends from the North to the South Pole. It takes one solar day today to complete one rotation; in other words, slightly less than 24 hours (23 hours, 56 minutes and 4.091 seconds).
 Consequences of the Earth's rotation.
 The Earth's rotation has three consequences: 
 The change from day to night. Due to the rotation, day and night occur regularly everywhere on the Earth. This is ' beca use the solar light illuminates and heats only one half of the Earth's surface (day). Meanwhile, the other half of the Earth remains in darkness and its temperature cools down (night). 
 If the Earth did not rotate on its axis, half of the planet would always be lit by the Sun and would reach very high temperatures. Then the other half of the Earth would remain in darkness and experience extreme cold. In these circumstances, life would be impossible. 
 The movement of the Sun on the horizon. The Earth rotates from west to east. This is why we see daylight and the Sun appear in the east (dawn). Then the daylight and the Sun disappear in the west (dusk). 
 This movement of the Sun is only noticeable because our planet moves around the Sun. However, the Sun enables us to identify the cardinal points or basic points of reference that we use to know where we are on the Earth: north, south, east and west. 
 The existence of the hours of the day. Scientific knowledge of the Earth's rotation allows us to divide the solar day into 24 equal parts, known as hours. We can then divide the Earth into 24 imaginary zones that correspond to an hour of the Earth's rotation. These are called time zones and we can use them to measure time.
 How the Earth moves . Revolution.
 The Earth revolves around the Sun. 
 The Earth's revolution refers to the way the Earth turns around the Sun. This happens in a west-east direction, and it takes 365 days and 6 hours, or one solar year, to be completed. As each year has 365 days, the remaining six hours are saved and every four years there is a leap year, which means an extra day is added to the month of February. ". 
 During its revolution, the Earth follows an elliptical trajectory, called an orbit. The Earth's axis is at an angle to the geometric plane of the orbit. During this annual journey around the Sun, the Earth covers a distance of approximately 930 miliion kilometres at a speed of 106000 km/h.
 The consequences of the Earth's revolution around the Sun.The seasons. 
 The angle of the Earth's axis means that, as the Earth revolves around the Sun, the positions of its two hemispheres change in relation to the Sun. As a result, they receive more or less heat from the Sun. 
 This fact causes the four seasons: summer, winter, spring and autumn. 
 When one of the Earth's hemispheres is turned towards the Sun, it grows hotter and has its summer, When it is turned away from the Sun, it receives less heat and has its winter. When it is neither fully turned towards or away from the Sun, then it has its spring or autumn.
 Other consequences.
 The different lengths of day and night in different places on Earth. The variation in the length of day and night results from the location of the circle of illumination or the line separating day and night in relation to the Earth's axis.
 At the spring and autumn equinoxes, the circle of illumination coincides with the Earth’s axis –day and night last the same length of time all around the world.
 At the  summer and winter solstices, the line of illumination advances or withdraws in relation to the Earth's axis -the length of day and night is different in each hemisphere. 
 The existence of thermal zones. These zones are due to the fact that the angle of the solar rays that strike the Earth change at different times of year. The solar rays provide more or less heat depending on whether they strike the Earth perpendicular to its surface or angled. 
 In the planet's tropical zones, the rays strike the Earth perpendicular or nearly perpendicular to its surface. As a result, the temperatures are always high. 
 In the temperate zones, they strike at an angle, the temperatures are more moderate. 
 And in the frigid zones, they strike the Earth's surface at a wider angle and so the temperatures are always very low.
 Representing the Earth’s area.
 Maps and their elements, 
 Geographers represent geographical space by using maps. 
 A map is a simplified representation of the Earth's spherical surface, or a part of it, depicted on a flat surface. To make maps, cartographers use a geographic grid, which is a system of projection. They also use a scale and a range of standard signs.
 The geographic grid. 
 To locate any point of the Earth's surface on a map, we need to use a geographic grid. In other words, we need to use a system of coordinates made up of two types of imaginary lines: l'i nes of latitude (parallels) and lines of longitude (meridians). 
 The parallels (Iines of latitude) are circles that run perpendicular to the axis of the Earth's rotation. The main or 0° line of latitude is the equator, which divides the Earth into two halves or hemispheres, north and south. Other important lines of latitude are the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn as well as the Arctic and Antarctic polar circles. 
 The meridians (Iines of longitude) are semicircles that run from one pole to the other. The prime meridian, or 0° line of longitude, is the one that runs through Greenwich, near London. 
 Using this geographic grid, it is possible to locate any point on a map by calculating its latitude and its longitude. These are measured in degrees. 
 The latitude is the distance of any one point on the Earth from the Equator. It can be north or south. 
 The longitude is the distance from any one point on the Earth to the 0 ° line of latitude, or the prime (Greenwich) meridian It can be east or west.
 .The system of projection, scale and standard signs.
 To create a map, it is also necessary to use three types of tools: a system of projection, a scale and a set of standard signs. 
 A system of projection is a method that enables the Earth's spherical surface to be represented on a flat surface.The grid of lines of latitude and longitude are transferred to a flat surface (plane projection) or to a surface that can be developed on a flat surface, such as a cylinder (cylindrical projection) or a cone (conic projection). 
 A scale is the relationship between a distance measured on the map and the corresponding distance on Earth itself. The most common scales are graphic and numerical. 
 The sets of standard signs used in maps combine colours, signs or symbols. They are used to represent reality in a simplified visual form. Their meaning is explained by a map's legend or key.
 Working with maps.The National Topographical Map. 
 Types of map. 
 Maps are traditionally divided into two major groups: thematic and basic. 
 Thematic maps represent the distribution of a specific geographical phenomenon in space, 
 Basic maps represent a territory's main physical and human features (terrain, waters, vegetation, population, land use). Their data is based on measurements taken directly from reality, which are used as a basis for the creation of thematic maps. The best known example is the Topographical Map.
 The topographical map, a basic map.
 The topographical map is a type of basic map. As with all maps, it includes: 
 General components: title, projection system, scale, legend explaining the signs and symbols used, and finally the toponomy or names of places represented. 
 Simplified representations of the main physical and human elements. Those relating to the physical environment include the terrain, represented with contour lines ; the waters, marked in blue; and vegetation shown using a variety of symbols. With regard to the human features these include population and land use (agriculture, industry, facilities, transport routes), administrative boundaries, etc. 
 Contour lines. 
 In topographical maps the terrain's altitude is represented with contour lines (B); these are lines that link all the points located at the same altitude. 
 There are two basic types of contour line. 
 Index contour lines are thicker and included every five contour lines. Their height is indicated with a number. 
 The secondary or normal contour lines are thinner and they are marked between the index contour lines. Their height is not given.
 