Studying history. 
 Historical sources. 
 A historian gathers evidence from the past in order to identify where it comes from and what it means. We call this material historical sources. Any evidence from the past is a historical source, but we can group them into three main types.
 backward: toward the past. 
 evidence: something that shows an event happened.
 forward: toward the future.
 gather: to collect.
 sequence: the order in which things happen.
 Types of historical sources.
 Written sources are the main source of information for historians. The invention of writing marked the end of prehistory and the beginning of history.
 Historians also study material sources such as pottery, tools, bones, etc. These are objects that archaeologists dig up in excavations.
 To learn about more recent history, historians can also study visual sources, like paintings, films, sculptures or photographs.
 History lab.
 Historical sources at home! .
 Anything that happened in the past is a historical event. Witnesses of historical events can give us valuable information to study. We can find out about past events by talking to older people. 
 You can ask your parents or your grandparents about their experience of an important event in recent years.
 Causes and effects of historical events
 Historical events do not happen in isolation; they form a sequence linked by causes and effects.
 Causes: to understand a historical event we need to know, what caused it, in other words, the reasons why it happened. These causes are diverse, so we have to find out and analyse the events that happened before.
 Effects: the historical event we're studying also produced effects of its own. These effects cause new historical events.
 Units to measure time.
 In order to understand history better, we put events in chronological order. In our culture we use the birth of Christ to organise dates. 
 Also, we use units to measure time: year, decade (ten years), century (one hundred years) and millennium (one thousand years). 
 If something happened before Christ, we write the letters BC (before Christ) and count backwards until we reach zero.
 If something happened after Christ, we add AD (Anno Domini) and count forwards.
 The eras of history.
 The first humans were nomads and hunters and gatherers who 
 sheltered in caves. They made the first tools and learnt to use tire.
 Neolithic Age.
 Humans learnt to raise crops and livestock and became sedentary. 
 They Iived in larger groups and built villages. they made huge technological progress, including the invention of pottery, the loom and the wheel.
 The Metal Age Humans discovered how to make metal tools, and the first trade networks developed between villages.
 The Ancient Times.
 Some cities on the river valleys of Mesopotamia, Egypt, China and India grew thanks to trade in the Metal Age. In these cities, systems of social organisation and communication emerged, like writing. There were important political and religious leaders, and all people were not treated equally. These were the first civilisations in history.
 Later on, Mediterranean cultures like the Greeks and the Romans developed. TheRomans built a great empire and conquered the lands to the north, including the Iberians and Celtiberians living in the Iberian Peninsula (Hispania). Here, they founded colonies called provinces with big cities and left a great cultural legacy.
 Found: to start.
 heir : a person who has the right to Become a king or a queen. 
 Legacy: something inherited from The past. 
 Loom: a machine used to weave Fabric.
 The Middle Ages. 
 t the beginning of the Middle Ages, urban life had declined. After the Fall of the Roman Empire in the 5th century, the continent was divided into Germanic kingdoms with feudal systems, where a few noblemen owned all the land. One of these kingdoms was the Visigoth Kingdom of Toledo, in Hispania. 
 In the 8th century, the Islamic Empire invaded Hispania and controlled the peninsula. They found al-Andalus, which became one of the greatest economic and cultural centres of its time. The Christians rose up against the Muslims to win back the territory in a process called the Reconquista. It ended in the 15th century. 
 This period saw a return of commerce and cultural expansion.The bourgeoisie took control of urban life.
 The Modern Age.
 The Fall of Constantinople to the Turks and the Discovery of America in 1492 marked the beginning of a new era. In this time period a new cultural and scientific movement developed, it was called Humanism. 
 Throughout the Modern Age, global discoveries and exploration brought new wealth and prestige to Europe's monarchs. Kings, queens and emperors ruled with few limits on their power. The new authoritarian monarchies took power away from the feudal nobles and gave privileges to the bourgeoisie. The Catholic Monarchs in Spain were one of the most outstanding examples of authoritarian monarchy in Europe. During their reign the Crowns of Castilla and Aragón were united, the Reconquista ended and the Spanish monarchy expanded its territories and power throughout Europe and America, the new 
 conquered land.
 Their heirs, the Habsburg kings Carlos I and Felipe II, inherited a great Empire. During their re igns in the 16th and 17th centuries, Spanish navigators conquered new territories in America, Africa and Asia . 
 The crisis of the Hispanic Monarchy came in the 17th century under the rule of the last Habsburg Kings, who delegated their duties to their validos, or favourite nobles.
 The monarchy recovered with arrival of the House of Bourbon in the 18th century. They established a centralised state and introduced the first reforms of the Enlightenment in the period of enlightened despotismo. 
 Contemporary Times.
 Just over two hundred years ago a new historical period began. In this new period, which still continues today, the world population has grown seven times more than in all the previous ages. New laws have also appeared to protect equal rights for everyone. There have been huge developments in technology too.
 Early Contemporary Times.
 Reolutions in the 18th century.
 The French Revolution and the Industrial Revolution marked the beginning of Contemporary Times.
 The French revolution.
 It broke out in France in 1789. People rose up against the injustices of  absolutism and they organised a government based on the ideas of the  enlightenment, such as equal rights and liberties for all citizens. These ideas were defended in two texts: the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, and the Constitution of 1791.
 Enlightenment spread the ideas of liberty and equal political and social rights for people of different social groups. 
 The Industrial Revolution. 
 It started in the late 18th century in England with the steam engine invention. Steam engines burnt coal to heat huge water boils which produced steam. This steam was used to move machines like looms in textile factories as well as trains and steam boats.
 Changes in the 19th century 
 As a consequence of these revolutions, the way people lived changed during the 19th century.
 Social Changes. 
 People were grouped according to the money they had. There were three main social classes: the upper class, formed by the bourgeoisie, the lower working class, formed by the workers, and between these two groups, there was the middle class.
 Technical And Medical advances. 
 Medical advances, like vaccines, prevented thousand of deaths and technical advances in agriculture produced more food. As a consequence, population growth increased in a period of humandemographic explosion in most of European countries.
 Political movements.
 In some European countries citizens demanded suffrage, which means the right to vote for their government. Factory workers united to demand decent working and living conditions. They carried out a series of strikes and protests which were called the labour movement.
 Spain at the beginning of the 19th century.
 The War of Independence. 
 French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte was extending his empire across Europe. 
 Spanish king Carlos IV of Bourbon and his son Fernando VII were fighting amongst themselves. This allowed Napoleon to invade Spain and put his brother on the throne under the name of José I Bonaparte. 
 On May 2 1808 the people of Madrid rose up against the French invasion. That meant the beginning of the War of Independence.
 The birth of liberalism. 
 The War of Independence was between Spain and France, but Spanish people with different political ideas were also in conflict, like in a civil war. Other countries participated in the war, on one side or another. Great Britain, fighting against Napoleon, was fundamental to the victory of Spain in 1814. 
 In 1812, during the war, the Cortes de Cádiz took place. This is where the first Constitution in the history of Spain was written. 
 It was a liberal text. This means it defended rights and liberties for citizens against absolutism. 
 The return to absolutism. 
 After the war, Fernando VII of Bourbon returned to the Spanish throne. 
 Despite the confidence the Spanish people had in the King, he  abolished the  Constitution and restored absolutism. This led to confrontations between liberals and absolutists in he following years, and this continued after the death of the monarch in 1833. 
 The Spanish colonies in America were not pleased with these events, and proclaimed their independence.
 abolish: to officially end or stop something, such as a law.
 be pleased: to be happy. 
 Spanish .politics in the 19th century.
 A war for the throne.
 Fernando VII changed the Law of Succession to the throne. The new law allowed his daughter Isabel, declared heir, to become queen.
 When the King died, Isabel was only three years old, and her mother, Queen María Cristina of Bourbon, ruled as regent.The Infante Carlos, brother of Fernando VII, disagreed with the new law of succession and attempted to claim the throne.
 Carlos was supported by the absolutists, known as the Carlists, and the Queen Regent gained the
 support of the liberals, who were able to approvethe Constitution of 1837.
 The absolutists, or Carlists, rejected this situation, and fought the Isabelinos in the First Carlist War.
 The reign of Isabel II.
 In 1843, at the age of only thirteen, Isabel was proclaimed Queen Isabel l.
 During her reign, the liberal politicians who had supported her, formed two parties: 
 The Moderate Liberals, represented by Narváez, were supported by the wealthy classes and defended conservative liberalism. While in power, they approved the Constitution of 1845.
 The Progressives, led by Espartero, represented the middle and lower classes and wanted to bring greater liberties for more sectors of the population.
 claim: to say that something belongs to you.
 exile: to force out of a country
 party: a political organisation
 regent: a person that carries out the role of ruler.
 restore: to return to its original condition.
 Uprising: rebellion.
 A period of democracy. 
 The reign of Isabel II lasted unti11868. In this year a military group rose up against the Queen and sh e went into exile in France. 
 The fall of Isabel II opened a democratic process in Spain. This resulted in the new Constitution of 1869, which established a parliamentary monarchy, where a monarch reigns but does not rule the country. The chosen king was Amadeo I. 
 The new king faced numerous problems that led him to renounce the throne in 1873. 
 The First Spanish Republic was then proclaimed, meaning the first government without a king. However, another military uprising restored  the monarchy soon after, in 1874.
 The Bourbon Restoration. 
 A year later, Alfonso XII of Bourbon, son of Isabel 11, was restored to the throne. In this period the Constitution of 1876 was approved. This was more conservative than the one before, and a new system of government allowed alternating of the two main political parties, the Conservatives, led by Cánovas del Castillo, and the Liberals, led by Sagasta. 
 The Restoration lasted after the death of the king. His wife, María Cristina of Habsburg, ruled as regent because her son Alfonso XIII, the heir, was still a baby. During her regency, Spain lost its last colonies: Cuba and the Philippines.
 Spanish society in the 19th century 
 Throughout this century economic and social transformations were bringing Spain closer to a modern society, but these changes happened very slowly.
 Economy and industrialization.
 The Industrial Revolution was late and slow and only arrived in places like the Basque Country, Catalonia and the large cities. 
 Most of the population still worked in the fields with underdeveloped technology, whereas countries like England or Germany used advanced machinery and were much more productive. 
 Modern forms of transport, like the railway, didn't appear until the second half of the century which further held up industrialisation and economic development in the country.
 Society.
 In spite of the low levels of industrialisation, the bourgeoisie became rich and thanks to the arrival of liberal ideas, they also became the dominant social class. 
 The Industrial Revolution brought serious social problems such as harsh working conditions and even child exploitation in factories. In rural areas, the peasants also lived in extreme poverty. These inequalities were the reason for the political demands or the working class.
 Art and culture. 
 Artists portrayed the changes of the times and many artistic styles emerged over the century. Despite the efforts of some governments to put children through school, the majority of the population was iIIiterate.
 Romanticism.
 At the beginning of the century, this style reflected the revolutionary atmosphere and faraway places.
 Realism.
 In the middle of the century, realist writers and painters decided to show the most disadvantaged aspects of the industrial ,society.
 Impressionism.
 At the end of the century, impressionist painters were influenced by technological advances and they reflected this on their work.
 Generation of 98.
 Formed by a group of writers and intellectuals who criticised Spanish society and called for the modernisation of the country.
 Scientific advances.
 Several researchers achieved scientific advances, for example, Ramón y Cajal received the first Nobel Prize for Science.
 Wealth became the basis of the new social classes, and the bourgeoisie, who had made money with the new industries, were now the upper class without needing to be long to the nobility.They lived in well-kept, modern neighbourhoods called ensanches.
 harsh: very difficult hold up: delay wealth: abundance of money. 
 well-kept: kept clean and tidy illiterate: not knowing how to read or write.
 