The coastal relief of Spain. 
 The Iberian Peninsula has 4,123 Kilometres of coastline. More than 3,100 km. are Spanish and around 950 Km. belong to Portugal.
 Coastal Regions.
 The coast is defined as the area where the land meets the sea. The type of coastal relief depends on the erosion caused by waves, wind and rain, as well as sediments deposited by rivers on their journey to the river mouth. 
 Spain is situated on a peninsula. It also has two archipelagos, the Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands, and two territories on the African coast, Ceuta and Melilla.
 Glossary.
 dune: a hill of sand piled up by the wind .
 inlet: a body of water that enters the land .
 sheer: perpendicular or nearly so. 
 ravine: a small, deep, narrow valley.
  wetland: low area of land flooded with water.
 The total coastline from Spain's archipelagos is 3,700 km, more than all of peninsular Spain. 
 The total length of coastline in Spain is actually 7,876 km. How can this be?
 Cantabrian coast. 
 This ranges from the mouth of the Bidasoa River, which separates France and Spain in the Basque Country, to the Punta de Estaca de Bares, in Galicia. 
 The coastline is straight, although occasionally the sea enters inland and forms river estuaries, such as those in Avilés or Bilbao. 
 It also has a rocky coast with many cliffs.
 Atlantic coast.
 This ranges from the Punta de Estaca de Bares to the straight of Gibraltar in Cádiz. 
 The Galician Atlantic Coast is rocky with high cliffs. Numerous inlets form river estuaries. 
 The Andalusian Atlantic Coast is straight, low-Iying and sandy with many beaches, wetlands and dunes. 
 The coast of the Canary Islands has tall, sheer cliffs between 100 and 400 metres high, due to their volcanic origins. The beaches are situated at the outlets of ravines. The exceptions are the extensive beaches of Lanzarote and Fuerteventura. 
 Mediterranean coast. 
 It ranges from Tarifa, in Cádiz , to Cabo de Creus in Gerona. 
 On the Catalan and Balearic Coasts there is a mixture of high, rocky areas with low-Iying sandy ones. Their main features are the Delta del Ebro, the Cabo de Creus and the Bahía de Palma. 
 The coasts of Valencia and Murcia are generally low-Iying and sandy.
 The Mediterranean coast in Andalucía alternates flat areas with cliffs.
  The rivers of Spain. 
 The direction a river flows in and the form its course takes are influenced by the landscape.
 The territory a river runs through and the tributaries that flow into it form a river basin.
 When the river basins formed by several rivers flow into the same sea or ocean this is called a watershed.
 Watersheds in Spain. 
 The Cantabrian watershed. 
 This area ranges the area from the Cantabrian Sea to the Cordillera Cantábrica and to the Montes Vascos. 
 The rivers here start in the Cordillera Cantábrica. They are short, although they have a very regular and abundant waterflow, due to heavy rainfall. 
 The Atlantic watershed.
 This area occupies a major part of Galicia, all the Meseta Central and the depression of the river Guadalquivir. 
  It has two types of rivers: 
 The Galician rivers are short with an abundant waterflow. 
 The central and southern rivers are long and have an irregular flow regime with more abundant water flow in winter and low water flow levels in summer. 
 The Mediterrahean watershed 
 This area Includes the depression of the river Ebro, on the east of the peninsula and all the Mediterranean coast of Andalucía . 
 Its most important river is the Ebro, which is also the longest river in Spain and the one with a more abundant water flow. 
 The rest of its rivers are short, with ah irregular flow regime. Flooding in autumn causes significant erosion.
      The rivers' mouth. 
 Rivers flow into the sea forming deltas and estuaries that are also features of the coastal landscape.
 When a river accumulates a great amount of sediment as it flows in its mouth, it creates a delta.
 When the sediments do not accumulate and the mouth of the river becomes larger, an estuary is formed.
 flood: to cover a dry area with water.
 The landscapes of Spain.
 Spanish landscapes vary greatly. This diversity is due to the fact that, although all Spanish territory is in a temperate climate zone, the water systems, vegetation and climates are not all the same.
 Inland Mediterranean landscape. 
 	An extensive plain dedicated to crops an dotted with deciduous trees growing along riverbanks.
 
 Mountain landscape.
 Extensive forests of evergreen trees such as pine woods or deciduous trees such as beech woods. 
 AtIantic Landscape. 
 Humid regions with a great deal of vegetation due to abundant rainfalls and rich soil. Extensive forests of deciduous trees such as oaks and beeches and plains with bushes and grassy meadows for livestock.
 Coastal Mediterranean landscape. 
 Dehesa forests of evergreen species such as holm oaks, cork oaks and pines, with two kinds of bushes: 
 Maquis shrubland: very dense and compact with tall bushes such as the strawberry tree, heather and the rockrose. 
 Thickets: low bushes found in drier areas such as rosemary, thyme, and lavender.
 Subtropical landscape.
 A volcanic mountainous area with many indigenous species such as the canary pine, the giant cactus, the drago tree and the tabaiba. 
 On the southern slopes of the islands, plants are adapted to drought conditions and on the more humid northern slopes vegetation is more abundant.
 
 
  
  
 