 The relief of Europe.
 Europe’s natural borders. 
 The continent of Europe is mainly flat, with an average elevation of 340 metres. 
 The surface area of Europe is around ten million square kilometres. Europe is the second-smallest continent after Oceania. Its natural borders are: 
 the Arctic Ocean to the north 
 the Atlantic Ocean to the west. 
 the Mediterranean Sea, the Black Sea and the Caucasus Mountains to the south. 
 To the east, the Ural Mountains, the Ural River and the Caspian Sea separate Europe from the continent of Asia.
 Europe's main landforms.
 Plains and lowlands: the most important is the Great European.
 Plain. Several rivers flow across it, forming numerous valleys. Other important plains are the East European Plain, the Hungarian Plain, and the Black Sea Plain.
 Plateaus and uplands: high, flat lands that are mainly in the north and the centre. They are less than 2,000 metres high. Some of the most important ones are the Meseta Central, in Spain, the Massif Central, in France, the Central Russian Upland, in Russia, and the Finnish Lakeland plateau, in Finland.
 Mountain chains: these are to the south of the centre of Europe, and are high and steep. The most important ones are the Pyrenees, the Alps, the Apennines, the Balkans, the Carpathians, the Scandinavian Mountains, the Caucasus Mountains, and the Ural Mountains.
 Coast: Europe has a varied coastline. Important features include the Gulf of Finland, the Gulf of Geneva, and Golfo de Vizcaya; Cabo de Fisterra, Cape Matapan and North Cape; the Strait of Gibraltar, Bosphorus Strait, and the English Channel; the Scandinavian Peninsula, the Kola Peninsula, the Crimea Peninsula:, the Iberian Peninsula, the Italian and Balkan peninsulas.
 steep: having an almost vertical angle.
 strait: a narrow passage of water connecting two other large areas of water.
  
 The coastal relief of Europe.
 Types of coastline. 
 Europe has almost 38,000 km of coastline .This has a jagged shape because the seawater wears away the softer rocks. 
 At times the seawater invades former valleys, as in the case of the Norwegian fiord. 
 At other times the mountains are close to the sea and this makes high coastlines, like the cliffs in the north. And if the land next to the sea is flat, it means low coastlines, like in Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany or Poland.
 fiord: a narrow part of the ocean between cliffs or mountains. 
 jagged: : having a sharply uneven edge or surface. 
 sundy: full of or covered with sand.
 wear away: to be gradually eroded by natural forces.
 Islands and archipelagos 
 In general, the islands are grouped into archipelagos, like the Canary Islands, Balearic Islands, Baltic Islands, Greek Islands, etc. But there are also large islands on their own, like Great Britain and Ireland.
 The rivers and lakes of Europe.
 The rivers of Europe.
 Europe is a continent of rivers. Rivers allowed early European cultures to develop networks for trade and communication. 
 European rivers flow into various seas and oceans. The continent has five watersheds: The Arctic, the Caspian Sea and the Black Sea. These have long wide rivers which cross Europe's large plains. They are navigable in summer, but many freeze over in winter. 
 The most important ones in the Arctic watershed are the Pechora  River and the Northern Ovina River; for the Caspian Sea, the Volga River; and for the Black Sea the Oanube and the Oniester.
 Atlantic. This watershed includes the continent's widest rivers because they cross areas where it rains a lot. They are long rivers, and generally navigable, flowing through large plains. 
 There are usually wide and deep estuaries at the mouths of  these rivers. The most important ones are: Rhine, Elbe, Loire, Tajo and Vistula.
 Mediterranean. This watershed includes shorter and more irregular rivers, since the water flow is strong in winter, but less strong in summer. They start in high, steep areas. Some important ones are the rivers Ebro, Rhone and Po.
 The main lakes of Europe.
 Europe has a large number of small lakes all aver the continent.Eurpoean lakes can be classified according to their location.
 Northern lakes.
 They originated from melted glaciers.Many of them are in Finland and Russia.Lakes Ladoga, Onega, Saimaa and Peipus are especially important.
 Alpine Lakes.
 These are found along the Alps mountains, for example, the Swiss lakes. Important ones include Lake Balaton in Hungary and Lake Garda in Italy.
 Mediterranean lakes.
 These are smaller but deeper.Important ones include the Albufera in Valencia (Spain), the lakes in Roussillon (France), and the Po Delta (Italy) .
 estuary: an area where a river. 
 flows into the sea navigable: deep and wide enough for boats and ships to travel on or through. 
 mouth: the end of the river where the river meets the sea.
 Landscape and vegetation in Europe. 
 Vegatation according to climate. 
 Apart from its relief, rivers and climate, one of the defining characteristics of a landscape is its vegetation. 
 Because of the great difference between the various climates in Europe, it's easy to identify different landscapes by looking at their vegetation. 
 There are three main factors that determine why different types of plants grow: humidity, hours of sunlight, and elevation.
 shrub: a low stemmed woody plant.
 steppe: a large, flat area of land with grass and very few trees especially in eastern Europe and Asia.
 VEGETATION OF OCEANIC CLlMATES. 
 In the west of Europe. 
 Deciduous trees, like oak and beech. On the coast there are flat areas of wild plants; shrubs, grass and bushes.
 VEGETATION OF MEDITERRANEAN  CLlMATES. 
 In the south of the continent, in the zones close to the Mediterranean. As well as bushes and shrubs, there are many evergreen trees, like holm oak, cork oak and pine . 
 VEGETATION OF MOUNTAIN CLlMATES. 
 In the large mountain ranges. Forests and meadows.
 VEGETATION OF CONTINENTAL CLlMATES In the centre and east of Europe. Meadows and steppes. To the north, the taiga (e forest of pine and fir trees). 
 VEGETATION OF SUBTROPICAL CLlMATES.
 The  Canary Islands. Rich in indigenous species, like the Canary Island 
 Pine and the drago tree.
 VEGETATION OF POLAR CLlMATES.
 In the north of the continent. Tundra, formed by moss and lichen, with no trees.
 Environmental conservation in Europe. 
 Sometimes,  we turn on the heating in winter even though it isn´t very cold. This means that we overheat our houses. 
 But the gases which are emitted when we do this contribute to making the atmosphere hotter. And this is a problem not just in our country, or even the rest of Europe. It’s a global problem!.
 Climate change: causes and consequences 
 Scientists warn us that climate change is a real environmental problem which affects the whole planet. 
 In Europe, there are several consequences of climate change: 
 Overall increase in temperature, especially in the south of the continent and the Arctic region, causing the ice of the glaciers to melt. This, in turn, causes sea levels to rise. 
 Increase in precipitation, causing floods, especially in the coastal zones, deltas and flood plains. However, in the north and northwest of Europe we are starting to see a certain decrease in precipitations. 
 Changes in ecosystems, causing displacement of plant and animal species towards the north of Europe and towards higher lands. 
 sustainable: able to last or continue for a long time. 
 aim: to have a specified goal or purpose.
 Sustainable development. 
 Fot thousands of years humans have modified their surroundings in order to gain access to natural resources. But in the last two centuries these changes have multiplied, due to population growth and technical and scientific progress. For this reason, we have seen a serious deterioration of the environment over recent decades. 
 To revert this we have to aim for sustainable development. This allows present-day society to progress without putting resources in danger for future generations. 
 For sustainable development to happen, the economy, society and the environment must be equal. If one aspect becomes more important than another, development is not sustainable. To achieve this, it is necessary to: 
 Make production and consumption sustainable: Change the way products and services are designed, produced, utilised and thrown away. 
 Fight against climate change: Reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. 
 Understand that the natural resources essential for life, such as water, air and land, are limited. 
 Build sustainable communities: developing green spaces and building houses that do not consume energy in excess. 
 Deforestation contributes to the increase in carbon dioxide  in the air, because when trees are burnt or cut down, the carbon they store returns to the atmosphere.
 An excess of gas emissions make the atmosphere retain too much heat and temperatures rise.
 